translate: basic/*-sorts (#124)
OI-wiki/i18n: docs/basic/merge-sort.md

Last translate with upstream: [ade5838](https://github.com/OI-wiki/OI-wiki/commit/ade5838af091655fbe3cbfc5558be6e7bb082e2a#diff-b97e8b19e438130ccaa688da85fce4bd7871d08b5e25c0d44b1a25947ec45ecb) ([PR #3321](https://github.com/OI-wiki/OI-wiki/pull/3321)) on July 14, 2021.

This article will briefly introduce the merge sort algorithm.

## Introduction

Merge sort is a sorting algorithm with [divide and conquer](./divide-and-conquer.md) paradigm.

## Working Principles

Merge sort has three steps:

1. Divide array into two parts;
2. Recursively merge sort the two sub-sequence;
3. Combine two sorted sub-sequence into one.

> It is not hard to tell that first two steps of merge sort can be easily implemented. However, the problem is how to combine two sub-sequence. We can notice that both sub-sequences are in order in step two. The third step is actually to combine two **ordered** sequence. (For implementation of which, please refer to example code below.) 

Author: 啊当时是因为原文就好 Ambiguous pwp 所以擅自加上了

> It is not hard to tell that first two steps of merge sort can be easily implemented. However, the problem is how to combine two sub-sequence. We can notice that the two sub-sequences are in order in step two. The third step is actually to combine two **ordered** sequence. (For implementation of which, please refer to example code below.) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is not hard to tell that first two steps of merge sort can be easily implemented. However, the problem is how to combine two sub-sequence. We can notice that both sub-sequences are in order in step two. The third step is actually to combine two **ordered** sequence. (For implementation of which, please refer to example code below.) 
```
> (For implementation of which, please refer to example code below.) 

这是要表达什么呢

Author: 当时觉得原文的递接关系不是很清楚吧。。。打算改回去

The space complexity of merge sort is $O(n)$.

## Code Implementations

### Pseudo Code

$$
\begin{array}{ll}
1 & \textbf{Input. }\text{Unsorted array}A\text{and temp array}T\\text{.}\
2 & \textbf{Output. }\text{Array}A\text{will be sorted in non-descending order stably.}\\
3 & \textbf{Method.}\\
4 & \text{merge}(A,\ T)\\
5 & \qquad\text{merge0}(A,\ T,\ 0,\ A.length)\\
6 & \text{merge0}(A,\ T,\ ll,\ rr)\\
7 & \qquad \textbf{if}\ \ rr - ll \leqslant 1\\
8 & \qquad\qquad \textbf{return}\\
9 & \qquad mid \gets \large\lfloor\frac{ll+rr}{2}\rfloor\\
10& \qquad\text{merge0}(A,\ T,\ ll,\ mid)\\
11&\qquad\text{merge0}(A,\ T,\ mid,\ rr)\\
12&\\
13&\qquad p \gets rr\\
14&\qquad q \gets mid\\
15&\qquad\textbf{for}\text{ each } i \text{ in the } ll\dots rr-1\\
16&\qquad\qquad\textbf{if}\ p\geqslant mid\ or\ q < rr\ and\ A[q] < A[p]\\
17&\qquad\qquad\qquad T[i] \gets A[q]\\
18&\qquad\qquad\qquad q \gets q+1\\
19&\qquad\qquad\textbf{else}\\
20&\qquad\qquad\qquad T[i] \gets A[p]\\
21&\qquad\qquad\qquad p \gets p+1\\
22&\qquad \text{copy }T[ll\dots rr-1] \text{ to } A[ll\dots rr-1]\\
\end{array}
$$

### C++

```cpp
// C++ Version
void merge(int ll, int rr) {

>   // The function's job is to sort an interval of array $a$ from $ll$ to $rr-1$. Array $t$ stores ordered sub-sequences temporarily.

Reviewer: 用 ``？

Author: 原文
如此

  }
  for (int i = ll; i < rr; ++i) a[i] = t[i];
}
// The key point of this code block is that only create array once to avoid useless construction and destruction of object in every recursive call.
```

### Python

```python
# Python Version
def merge_sort(ll, rr):
    if rr - ll <= 1:
        return
    mid = math.floor((rr + ll) / 2)
    merge_sort(ll, mid)
    merge_sort(mid, rr)
    p = s = ll
    q = mid
    while(s < rr):
        if p >= mid or (q < rr and a[p] > a[q]):
            s += 1
            q += 1
            t[s] = a[q]
        else:
            s += 1
            p += 1
            t[s] = a[p]
    for i in range(ll, rr):
        a[i] = t[i]
```

## Inversion

Merge sort can be used to find the [inversion number](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inversion_(discrete_mathematics)#Inversion_number).

A inversion pair $(i,j)$ is a number pair that satisfied $a_{i} > a_{j}$ and $i < j$.

<!---
From Wikipedia:
> Let $\pi$ be a permutation. If $ i < j $ and $\pi(i)>\pi(j)$, either the pair of places $(i,j)$ or the pair of elements $\bigl (\pi (i),\pi (j)\bigr )$ is called an inversion of $\pi$. 
-->

> <!---原文过于Ambiguous了-->

Reviewer: 🤔 是没写定义 a 吗

可以去上游 contribute 一下

Author: 恩呢
那就重开issue了（跑

oi-wiki/oi-wiki#3405

Author: 大概是的

> The commented statement `ans += mid - p` in previous code implementation is counting the inversion number. Specifically, when the algorithm places latter elements to former places, (since smaller elements are placed former), any other element former than the original position and greater than the element forms inversion pairs with this element. The inversion number is the number of elements not yet combined, `mid - p`.

Author: count?

> The commented statement `ans += mid - p` in previous code implementation is counting the inversion number. Specifically, the algorithm replaces latter elements to former places, i.e, smaller<!---less? 不太对--> elements are placed former. Therefore, any other element former than the original position and greater than the element becomes inversion pairs with this element. The inversion number is the number of elements not yet combined, `mid - p`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The commented statement `ans += mid - p` in previous code implementation is counting the inversion number. Specifically, when the algorithm places latter elements to former places, (since smaller elements are placed former), any other element former than the original position and greater than the element forms inversion pairs with this element. The inversion number is the number of elements not yet combined, `mid - p`.
```

Author: 啊学到了（？

Author: 不过这里要另外改一下

Merge sort can be used to find the [inversion number](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inversion_(discrete_mathematics)#Inversion_number).

An inversion pair $(i,j)$ is, for an array $a$, a number pair that satisfied $a_{i} > a_{j}$ and $i < j$.

> The commented statement `ans += mid - p` in previous code implementation is counting the inversion pairs. Specifically, when the algorithm places latter elements to former places, (since smaller elements are placed former), any other element former than the original position and greater than the element forms inversion pairs with this element. The inversion number is the number of elements not yet combined, `mid - p`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The commented statement `ans += mid - p` in previous code implementation is counting the inversion pairs. Specifically, when the algorithm places latter elements to former places (since smaller elements are placed former), any other elements former than the original position and greater than the element forms inversion pairs with this element. The inversion number is the number of elements not yet combined, i.e. `mid - p`.
```
